I"vo<p>Common textual approaches to constitutional interpretation prioritize the text of the constitution, assuming the legitimacy of that approach. Justice Antonin Scalia expounds — quite vigorously in fact — his brand of textual originalism, but careful analysis and exploration reveals substantial issues with his account. Textualism demands <em>philosophical</em> grounding, not simply legal, and so it must rely upon a coherent theory of democracy. <strong>Scalia’s jurisprudence does not.</strong></p>

<p>Indeed, through this analysis, we shall move past interpreting the text for the text’s sake — or even for equality’s sake — but for the sake of democracy, properly understood, and we will no longer be stuck in the moral world of the 18th century, but free to follow our own moral compass — magnetized by deliberation and consensus — towards a better realization of our most common democratic belief, the right to self-rule.</p>

<h4 id="scalias-jurisprudence">SCALIA’S JURISPRUDENCE</h4>

<p>Let’s begin first by exploring the nature of Scalia’s jurisprudence and continuing to unpack its deeper philosophical underpinnings. We will see that his account in inconsistent and lacking.</p>

<p>Justice Scalia has vigorously pursued a textualist jurisprudence. The text is paramount, and to understand the text, the jurist must use the judicial tradition and canon when confronted with an ambiguity. In the realm of statutory interpretation, the jurist has the full body of judicial precedent; in constitutional interpretation the issues goes more complex. Scalia turns to the specific legal tradition flowing from that text — to “what it meant to the society that adopted it.” He states that this does not mean interpretation demands gleaning intent; instead, he chastises the search for intent, as it employs the common law mentality of American judges to overrun the need for textual interpretation. Textual originalism, however, requires an appreciation of the meaning of a text, not its intent.</p>

<p>The distinction between meaning and intent is key here. To get at the intent is to get at the idea in the scribe’s mind; to get at the meaning is to get at the context and understanding of the time. For the latter, the justice must play the historian, specifically with regards to constitutional interpretation, and attempt to understand what a word would have meant at that time to the population. Scalia explains the process, explaining the apparent contradiction of reading the founding documents:</p>

<blockquote>
  <p>“I will consult the writings of some men who happened to be delegates to the Constitutional Convention — Hamilton’s and Madison’s writings in The Federalists, for example. I do so, however, not because they were Framers and therefore their intent is authoritative and must be the law; but rather because their writings, like those of other intelligent and informed people of the time, display how the text of the Constitution was originally understood… What I look for in the Constitution is precisely what I look for in a statute: the original meaning of the text, not what the original draftsmen intended.”</p>
</blockquote>

<p>Thus, the historical background would contextualize the text, hopefully providing substantive meaning to the language. To be fair, there may be disagreement among originalists — different histories, different contexts — but the discussions are centered on the meaning, not the intent.</p>

<p>Scalia quickly and forcefully notes, though, that this process grounds the meaning of the text in the original time. The meaning of the Constitution now is the meaning of the constitution when ratified. Consider the controversial eighth amendment to the constitution for illustration. It reads, “Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.” After reading, one is left to ask, “what is a cruel and unusual punishment?” Scalia is too, but he knows where to look. He would dive into the historical record, searching for what were cruel and unusual punishments and what the principled grounds for them were when the amendment was ratified. That information would then be abstracted to form the moral sense of that time, which would then be applied to the current. In this, he does not deny the concept that the terms “cruel and unusual” are abstract, moral principles — morality, indeed, is quite abstract — but he time dates these principles, locking them into the founding era. At least for interpretation, that is. He recognizes that these principles may change, that society may progress, but the text does not. He cites the example of capital punishment, an arguably unusual punishment in our time, but as it was widely used in 1791, the death penalty would pass constitutional muster for a textual originalist. When the people ratified the amendment in 1791, their democratic action legitimated its force and thus their moral sentiments underpin the text.</p>

<p>Paramount in Scalia’s account is the primacy of the rule of law: the law, once democratically enacted, should be respected. This is what he calls “democratic formalism” or what another could call democratic proceduralism. “Of all the criticisms leveled against textualism, the most mindless is that it is ‘formalistic.’ The answer to that is, of course it’s formalistic! The rule of law is about form…. Long live formalism. It is what makes a government a government of laws and not of men.” In the judicial realm, formalism means rules and procedures in interpretation, not common-law positivism. He warns against the common-law judge’s, or living constitution judge’s, often arbitrary and possibly biased interpretation: that is rule by men, and according to Scalia, that is not compatible with our system of government. He uses that argument then against loosening the constitution’s abstract principles, as that would free the judges to unguided interpretation and, in effect, judicial law-making, which lack democratic legitimacy. That claim, though, requires substantiation, and, furthermore, whatever values we find in his textualism must be greater than the values we find in alternative approaches.</p>

<h4 id="dworkins-challenge">DWORKIN’S CHALLENGE</h4>

<p>Let’s begin by examining the argument for and against time dated abstract principles and then continue to consider the democratic legitimacy of Scalia’s jurisprudence. Legal scholar Ronald Dworkin takes up the issue of time dated principles with Scalia. In his Justice in Robes, Dworkin not only rejects Scalia’s account, but also continues to advance a fidelity system of interpretation. Dworkin begins by introducing a distinction of semantic intent, “which takes what the legislators meant collectively to say as decisive of the constitution,” and expectation intent, “which makes decisive what they expected to accomplish in saying what they did.” He places Scalia’s account of statutory interpretation comfortably in the former, and Scalia himself places his constitutional jurisprudence in the former as well. Dworkin does not let him so quickly. He contends that Scalia in adding in the time restrictions on the abstract moral principles is reading into the constitution new text.</p>

<blockquote>
  <p>“I said that if Scalia were a true semantic originalist, he would be assuming, in that argument, something that seems very odd: that the framers intended to say, by using the words “cruel and unusual,” that punishments generally thought cruel at the time they spoke were to be prohibited — that is, that they would have expressed themselves more clearly if they had used the phrase “punishments widely regarded as cruel and unusual at the date of this enactment” in place of the misleading language they actually used.”</p>
</blockquote>

<p>Under this analysis, a text free of time dating qualifications cannot be interpreted to include time dating. Thus, the relevant question is not, “what was cruel and unusual in 1791,” but rather, “what is cruel and unusual.” Dworkin explains, judges must then, “sometimes ask themselves whether punishments the framers would not themselves have considered cruel — capital punishment, for example — nevertheless are cruel, and whether discriminations the framers themselves thought consistent with equal citizenship — school segregation, for example — are nevertheless a denial of equal protection of the laws.” Moral philosophy creeps into constitutional jurisprudence, and the robe must at once cover a judge and philosopher.</p>

<blockquote>
  <p>Moral philosophy creeps into constitutional jurisprudence, and the robe must at once cover a judge and philosopher.</p>
</blockquote>

<p>Oddly, Scalia fears those dual roles. He seems overly modest in accepting the role as historian over philosopher. Nonetheless, he substantiates his disagreement with Dworkin on three (fairly philosophical) grounds. He accepts Dworkin’s semantic and expectation intent distinction, but he argues that his time-dated understanding of the Bill of Rights is consistent with semantic intent. First, he argues that contextualizing the abstract language with the less abstract, more concretely “time-dated” language produces a time-dated Bill of Rights via the canon of construction “noscitur ex sociies” (a word is known by its companions). Second, again through contextualization, the Bill of Rights is seen to secure certain rights, and the passage of time cannot alter those rights. Third and finally, if we assume the original expectation of judicial review, then the Bill of Rights would, in context, be time dated as they would be applied immediately by the judiciary. Moreover, Scalia adds that the judiciary would not logically be the best home to the moral debate incumbent on Dworkin’s (and Tribe’s) approach.</p>

<p>As for the first charge, Scalia clearly overreaches. He employs the legal canon, “noscitur ex sociies,” which means simply that a word is know by its companions. This is commonly used to explain an ambiguity in a particular statute but contextualizing it with the neighboring language. Scalia argues that the concrete and specific nature of some amendments (e.g. the barring of quartering of soldiers) should carry over to the more abstract ones (namely, the first amendment), limiting their scope. First, clearly this argument, though, does not make the amendments time dated. Second, the fact that some amendments use precise language and other are more general is notable, in and of itself; this does not necessarily mean “scriber’s error,” nor does it justify the contextualization with the surrounding amendments. Finally, that legal axiom generally applies to language in a particular statute, but as each amendment stands alone in the first place, it may not even apply. The second point Scalia raises regards the content of rights. In this, however, he misses the crux of Dworkin’s argument: the text does not specify the contents of the rights. To substantiate his claim — that the right contents are those seen in 1791 — then he must rely on some external source of legitimacy for that claim — the context of the constitution does not provide that. There is a distinction between immutability and particularity. The application of a particular understanding of a right at a given time does not deny that rights immutability, nor does it mean that that understanding is the immutable right. Application of a particular understanding could merely demonstrate the best approximation of an abstract and immutable conception of a right. Scalia would likely respond that the legitimate and immutable understanding in a democracy is the one applied during the democratic process, but that argument hinges on his conception of democracy — a concept we will return to later. Thus, Scalia’s second response to Tribe and Dworkin is not as persuasive (or at least decisive) as he would like. The third issue raised centers on the efficacy of an abstract right being defined in a democracy by the judiciary. Scalia argues that contours of the abstract principles in the Bill of Rights would be best explored in the legislature, not the judiciary: “… the argument that the repository of ultimate responsibility for determining the content of the rights (the judiciary) is a most unlikely barometer of evolving national morality but a traditional interpreter of “time-dated” laws, rests upon context as well.” Here, though, Scalia mischaracterizes Dworkin’s argument. He is not calling for the Supreme Court to be the “barometer of evolving national morality,” but instead, for them to be the interpreter’s of the text of the constitution, a constitution which includes abstract principles — which may not be time-dated. Thus, he must explain why the principles must be time-dated, and instead of using context — as he promised to — he used tradition. Just because something has been done doesn’t make it right. To make a case for time-dated abstract principles, Scalia must look elsewhere. He has more work to do.</p>

<p>Thus, it seems on strict textual grounds, Scalia’s call for time-dated abstract principles is insufficient. Dworkin’s assessment of a lack of textual evidence substantiating originalism is persuasive. Nonetheless, this does not settle the issue. Dworkin could argue that the constitution itself may not require originalism, but Scalia could respond that democracy does. Moreover, Scalia insists upon the “rule of law,” and there may be a case for textualism in that concept. Nonetheless, we need a deeper story about how that law — in this case, the constitution — came to be, and then, whether that is legitimate. Moreover, if there are competing claims on the legitimizing force of originalism (or even the constitution) we will have to compare them for persuasiveness and attractiveness. Scalia’s argument does, in fact, move past the text simply: it stands upon his conception of democracy, a proceduralist view. Dworkin needs a similar move: the constitution does not explicitly call for a “semantic intent” reading, so his analysis requires external substantiation as well. In the following section, I aim to show how both are fundamentally insufficient or, at least secondary, to competing views of democracy and democratic rights.</p>

<h4 id="scalias-democracy">SCALIA’S DEMOCRACY</h4>

<p>Scalia’s conception of democracy is fundamentally a proceduralist one. As Scalia <a href="http://www.cmc.edu/salvatori/publications/the-textualist-jurisprudence-of-justice-scalia">observed</a> in response to a question by Senator Howard Metzenbaum during his Senate confirmation hearings:</p>

<blockquote>
  <p>“[A] constitution has to have ultimately majoritarian underpinnings. To be sure a constitution is a document that protects against future democratic excesses. But when it is adopted, it is adopted by democratic process. That is what legitimates it…[I]f the majority that adopted it did not believe this unspecified right, which is not reflected clearly in the language, if their laws at the time do not reflect that that right existed, nor do the laws at the present date reflect that the society believes that right exists, I worry about my deciding that it exists.”</p>
</blockquote>

<p>This means that the legitimating force to the constitution is the effectual majoritarian ratification by the people. We will use a basic account of majoritarism that says when the majority passes a bill, it becomes law, and all must abide by it. Thus, along with this majoritarism comes the rule of law. Then, relying on his earlier — and well-received — arguments for textual interpretation of democratic legislative, we can see primacy placed on the text of the constitution. Still, though, we are left with the issue of semantic versus expectation intent, and in this, though, he would likely have to slide into expectation intent to substantiate his claim, though. Scalia does not fully present an argument from majoritarianism to time-dated principles, but here I will try to rehearse one. Consider rights to be immutable abstract principles — say, the right against cruel and unusual punishment — but remember that there may be disagreements over the contents or different particular applications of them.</p>

<p>As we are discussing changing values over time, let’s consider a mathematical illustration. Consider the abstract principle that restricts cruel and usual punishment to be the function C(t). The input in this function is time and the value is the particular understanding of that principle at that time (we’ll use an arbitrary range 1–10). So C the function doesn’t change, just the input and output. Consider these (fictitious) results: C(1600) = 2; C(1791)=5; C(1863)=2; C(1964)=8. Now at all these times, people may say they know that the principle of cruel and unusual punishment is, but, of course, the values differ. This isn’t gleaning intent, but contextualizing the notion of a right. Another important point is that we may be able to put different conceptions into perspective — and even judge what is right and wrong — but at each given time, it is likely those people thought they were right: 2 was the right answer in 1600. Now, even though the right may be immutable, for a proceduralist, it only has force once enacted by a democratic process. It was one particular democratic process that legitimated the right, and so it would have to be and understanding of that right at that time. Although eras of democrats may agree on the function, the values differ depending on the time, and only the founding values — that is, the particular conception in 1791, in this case — apply. Furthermore, the constitution, a democratically legitimized document, itself is then a limit on the legitimate exercise of democratic principles in the future. Fixed principles would mean tighter restrictions, and from the proceduralist view of democracy, tighter restrictions — that is, concrete rights — could have instrumental value to a better realization of that conception of democracy. Essentially, the constitution sets the rules for our democratic game, and Scalia would argue, you should have some fixed rules (which, of course, can be argued over) while playing the game. Thus, time-dating is necessary and legitimate: the principles would then ensure consistency with that initial democratic procedure and have the added benefit of predictability in terms of judicial interpretation. Thus, there would be democratic and practical benefits to time dating. Pure procedure, though, does not grasp the essence of democracy.</p>

<p>In <em>Democratic Rights: The Substance of Self-Government</em>, Corey Brettschneider explains (indirectly) Scalia’s misunderstanding. A procedural democratic theory justifies a democratic government not by its ends, but by its means: the process of decision-making is paramount. Scalia assumes a proceduralist approach is justified, hence legitimating, but it is hard to see how this works. Although somewhat sensible, this position demands further justification: as Brettschneider puts it, “ any good procedure, like any good theory, must have reasons and principles that support it.” A simple justification for a majoritarian view holds that it maximizes the possibility for inclusion in the public decision-making process. This aim, though, could be contradicted by the result of the procedure it justifies: a democratic body — without restrictions installed — could disenfranchise a voting bloc, and thus, fail its own purpose. Although a constitution itself could limit such an anti-democratic action, using majoritarian principles to legitimate that constitution would still suffer from a similar argument. Scalia does not provide an answer to the simple question, why majoritarianism, especially to the likely minority in any case. His account is unpersuasive. A justification for the rationale behind democratic principles is necessary.</p>

<h4 id="dworkins-democracy">DWORKIN’S DEMOCRACY</h4>

<p>Dworkin does — to an extent. He provides a more rich account of democracy in his <em>Justice in Robes</em> as what he calls <em>partnership democracy</em>. “Democracy means self-government by all of the people acting together as members of a cooperative joint venture with equal standing.”</p>

<p>Incumbent on his view, then, are certain conditions that all members of a democracy must be guaranteed: equal part in political life, equal stake in government, and a private sphere. With these conditions, Dworkin escapes the minority rights problem Scalia faced, and thus, he provides a much more attractive conception of democracy. Then, majoritarian is at least justified, and ratification of the constitution via those principles as instrumental to the realization of the three principles. Moreover, he holds that the Bill of Rights must be morally argued by jurists, and they must constantly tend to the democratic conditions. Dworkin’s account, though, seems to disconnect jurisprudence from the textual interpretation, altogether, which is surprising, considering his insistence on “fidelity.” If the constitution is simply instrumental to the democratic outcomes — that is, outcomes consistent with the democratic conditions — then the particular procedure is relevant and the text of the constitution is superfluous. A jurist must simply make his case during judicial review with respect to the democratic conditions — which, one should add, could provide limited liberty — not the text of the constitution. Moreover, under this partnership democracy, one could argue that a jurist has an imperative to overturn parts of the constitution itself that she considered undemocratic or, at least, prohibiting the realization of a democratic condition. Thus, with Dworkin we see an attractive conception of democracy, but an unrestrained theory of jurisprudence. Brettschneider notes this as well, qualifying Dworkin as an outcome-oriented theorist focused on the “equal status of citizens.” That singular focus, according to Brettschneider, oversimplifies democracy, which must incorporate some notion of the process involved as well. Moreover, by selling democracy as instrumental that one good — “equal status of citizens” — Dworkin (and other epistemic theorists) loses persuasiveness.</p>

<p>Brettschneider groups various <em>outcome-oriented theorists</em> — some aiming for equality, others good or truth — into a set of “<em>epistemic theorists</em>” and then promptly brushes them aside. It may ground the basis for democracy, but that theory must ground itself: as Brettschneider puts it, “because, the epistemic theorist has appealed to non-democratic procedure-independent standard, she must demonstrate that this standard is more fundamental than democracy.” This is problematic. Finding and instating a consensus on a single view of the good or source of truth would be, according to Brettschneider, unlikely and, thus, undemocratic: the imposition of a particular view on non-believers would violate their right to self-rule. Moreover, it would be nearly impossible. On other level, we can see how in terms of legitimating governance structure, an approach focused completely on the outcome lacks clarity and precision in creating an actual governing body.</p>

<h4 id="brettschneiders-democracy">BRETTSCHNEIDER’S DEMOCRACY</h4>

<p>Brettschneider proposes an alternative definition of democracy: value theory. He provides the noncontroversial definition of democracy: “citizens authorizing legitimate law through their participation in democratic procedures.” Value theory is more legitimate than other procedure-independent theories as it is grounded in the ideal of democracy, not an external conception. Implicit in this definition is the idea of self-rule. It is this status, or understanding, that is more important to the particular expression of self-rule, which incorporates, to an extent, Scalia’s intrinsic valuing of majoritarianism. In appreciating citizens as self-rulers, value theory demands the proper treatment of them, which tends to Dworkin’s concerns for democratic conditions. Thus — at least to the parties to our discussion — value theory seems the most attractive. Now we must turn the issue back around: can value theory provide a sound basis for constitutional interpretation?</p>

<p>Brettschneider lays out a general approach to judicial interpretation that emphasizes democracy. Value theory promises both procedural and substantive ideals, but, interestingly, it recognizes the tension between them. When procedures produce legislation that threatens rights or when legislation is overturned to protect rights, there is what Brettschneider calls a “loss to democracy.” The courts must weigh the positive value of the exercise of political autonomy in the creation of legislation against the detriment to democratic values when determining whether to overturn legislation. Brettschneider contends that the court somewhat recognizes value theory in its acceptance of substantive due process rights, as seen in the Texas sodomy case. Moreover, value theory presents a far more attractive, coherent, and deep conception of democracy, which seems to solve Scalia’s pure proceduralism problems. At the same time, if we consider ratification of the constitution a legitimate exercise of political autonomy, then a judge upholding value theory would have to respect the text of the document as well. Value theory promises a jurisprudence more liberal than Scalia’s and more conservative than Dworkin’s: there is democratic legitimacy and judicial restraint. The Bill of Rights would be seen as listing abstract principles — just as Scalia and Dworkin admit — but they would not be time-dated. They would embody the substantive democratic rights that are, as Scalia insists, immutable, and the particular application of the understanding of the rights would be guided by the court’s understanding of the democratic values, much like Dworkin’s hope for moral interpretation. This process would overcome the arbitrary nature of time-dated principle and, at the same time, ensure set guidance for jurists in judicial review.</p>

<blockquote>
  <p>Once if we accept democracy as the proper reflection of our right to self-rule, then there is no reason we should not continue to explore the concept, continue to ask questions about what it means to be free, to be democratic, to be self-rulers.</p>
</blockquote>

<p>Of course, challenges remain: uncertainty over conflicting values, limited acceptance, and loose constitutionalism. If nothing else, by examining value theory, we are able to see the shortcomings of two (alleged) textualists and recognize the role democratic theory plays into jurisprudence.</p>

<p>Let’s examine more closely of the role, then, of the court in value theory. A proceduralist could be seen as using the judiciary as simply a check on democratic procedures: the legislature is the truly democratic institution, the courts distant cousins. Value theory, though, makes the judiciary part of the family. The courts are not simply a curb on democracy, but a dispensation of it. A strong judiciary is a member of democracy, just as much as the legislature. When the courts knock down legislation, they are not necessarily impeding democracy, but sometimes they may be protecting (or even advancing) it.</p>

<p>Scalia is right to worry about unguided judges, free to apply their will with no popular recourse. In value theory, though, there is a guide, democratic values, and they rightly assume that there will be disagreements on the contents of our substantive rights. But those disagreements and debates are encouraged: they’re how we become more perfect. Once if we accept democracy as the proper reflection of our right to self-rule, then there is no reason we should not continue to explore the concept, continue to ask questions about what it means to be free, to be democratic, to be self-rulers.</p>
:ET